---
layout: post
title: '"I want to herniate a disk" -- said no one ever'
date: 2015-07-11T19:21:46-06:00
categories: 1rm
excerpt: "No one asks for a herniated disk, but this is the risk you take when you load the squat bar for a 1 rep max. A safer alternative is a 3-5 rep technical failure max."
---

As a coach, there is nothing better than witnessing an athleteâ€™s smile after
they have set a personal record. Traditionally personal records are set with a
1 rep max, but with this comes risk. I have gone away from a 1 rep max to a 3-5
rep technical failure max and have still witnessed plenty of ear to ear grins.
As a coach my first goal is to minimize risk in the weight room and challenging
athletes with a 3-5 technical failure rep max has done that.

![1 rep max squats can be dangerous](http://assets.blog.leadrbox.com.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/maxresdefault.jpg)

There are 26 bones or vertebrae that make up the spinal column and they are
each cushioned by disks. Each disk is made up of two parts, a soft, gelatinous
portion inside along with a tough outer ring. These disks are shock absorbers
and help prevent damage during movement and in particular loading a movement,
such as squatting.  A herniation or slipped disk occurs when the soft portion
protrudes through the tough outer ring causing severe discomfort. There may
also be numbness and pain associated if the disk compresses one of your spinal
nerves.

No one asks for a herniated disk, but this is the risk you take when you load
the squat bar for a 1 rep max. Your core will alway go before your legs and
these heavy loads can put a great strain on your lower back improving your risk
of a slipped disk.

A safer alternative to a 1 rep max is a 3-5 rep technical failure max.
Technical failure is when form or technique breaks down and compensating
begins, basically, the squat just gets ugly. To minimize breakdown in the
squat, optimize your hip, thoracic-spine, and ankle mobility and train for
stability through your core.  Form over weight should always be the goal and
wearing a weight belt along with a spotter will also help maintain the
integrity of the squat.

Still want to know what your athlete's 1 rep max is? Try using a [free 1
rep-max calculator](http://1rm.io) to calculate a 1 rep max for a given number
of reps at a specific weight.
